+++
title = "How black-box use of imputation can cause bias"
date = 2017-09-13T00:00:00  # Schedule page publish date.
draft = true

# Talk start and end times.
#   End time can optionally be hidden by prefixing the line with `#`.
time_start = 2019-09-16
time_end = 2019-09-16
all_day = true

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["Nicole S. Erler"]

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = "Missing values pose a complication many applied researchers need to deal with, however, the handling of missing values is usually not the focus of the research. As a consequence, standard imputation methods that are readily available in software, like multiple imputation using chained equations (MICE), are applied in a black-box fashion to fix the problem and move on to the analysis of interest quickly, and the appropriateness of the imputation models not considered. Furthermore, researchers are often unaware of the assumptions implied by the imputation method and the bias that can be caused by their violation. Violations can be due to imputation model misspecification. This may occur when associations between outcome and covariates, or among covariates, are non-linear or interact with each other, or when incomplete continuous variables are not (conditionally) normally distributed. Moreover, complex outcomes, like repeatedly measured or survival outcomes, require special attention. In the present study, we evaluate the bias caused by several misspecifications of imputation models in MICE and a fully Bayesian approach that has been shown to be superior to MICE in settings with complex outcomes. Moreover, we discuss possible extensions of the Bayesian approach with non- and semi-parametric methods, such as penalizes splines, to increase the flexibility of the imputation models and thereby reduce the risk of misspecifications. Additionally, we investigate if, and how, posterior predictive checks can be used to automate evaluation of imputation model fit and to alert users of potential misspecifications."
abstract_short = ""

# Name of event and optional event URL.
event = "Tagung der Fachgruppe Methoden & Evaluation der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Psychologie"
event_url = "http://www.fgme2019.de"

# Location of event.
location = "Kiel, Germany"

# Is this a featured talk? (true/false)
featured = true

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this talk with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["deep-learning"]` references 
#   `content/project/deep-learning/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects = []

# Tags (optional).
#   Set `tags = []` for no tags, or use the form `tags = ["A Tag", "Another Tag"]` for one or more tags.
tags = ["imputation", "JointAI", "R", "Bayes", "mis-specification", "non-linear", "interaction"]

# Slides (optional).
#   Associate this talk with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides = "example-slides"` references 
#   `content/slides/example-slides.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides = ""`.
slides = ""

# Links (optional).
url_slides = "slides/FGME2019_Erler.pdf"
url_pdf = ""
url_video = ""
url_code = ""

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = true

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder. 
[image]
  # Caption (optional)
  caption = ""

  # Focal point (optional)
  # Options: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight
  focal_point = "Right"
+++
