+++
title = "Imputation of missing covariates: when standard methods may fail"
date = 2017-07-11T00:00:00  # Schedule page publish date.
draft = false

# Talk start and end times.
#   End time can optionally be hidden by prefixing the line with `#`.
time_start = 2017-07-11T12:36:00
time_end = 2017-07-11T12:54:00
all_day = true

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["Nicole S. Erler", "Dimitris Rizopoulos", "Oscar H. Franco", "Emmanuel M.E.H. Lesaffre"]

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = "Our work is motivated by examples from two large cohort studies, the Generation R Study and the Rotterdam Study, in which the analysis models of interest involved non-linear effects, interaction terms or had a longitudinal outcome. As is the case for most observational datasets, missing values in multiple variables complicated the analyses. The most popular method to deal with missing values is multiple imputation using the fully conditional specification (FCS). In settings like our motivating examples, however, the analysis and imputation models specified by FCS are incompatible, which violates an important assumption of FCS and may result in severely biased estimates. Even though many applied researchers have to deal with incomplete data, often they are not aware of the assumptions that are required to obtain valid results from the imputation methods implemented in standard software or the bias that may result from violations.<br> In our present work, we briefly review assumptions of FCS and the potential effects of violations thereof. We discuss previously proposed extensions aiming to reduce bias due to incompatibility and contrast them to recent approaches that specify imputation models that assure compatibility utilizing the Bayesian framework. Focusing on methods that are available in existing or newly developed R packages, the application of these methods will be illustrated for generalized linear as well as linear mixed models that involve non-linear effects or interaction terms, using relevant data from several recent studies."
abstract_short = ""

# Name of event and optional event URL.
event = "28th Annual Conference of the International Society for Clinical Biostatistics"
event_url = "http://www.iscb2017.info/"

# Location of event.
location = "Vigo, Spain"

# Is this a featured talk? (true/false)
featured = true

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this talk with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["deep-learning"]` references 
#   `content/project/deep-learning/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects = []

# Tags (optional).
#   Set `tags = []` for no tags, or use the form `tags = ["A Tag", "Another Tag"]` for one or more tags.
tags = ["imputation", "JointAI", "R", "Bayes", "mis-specification", "multiple imputation", "smcfcs", "jomo", "mice", "survival", "longitudinal", "non-linear", "interaction"]

# Slides (optional).
#   Associate this talk with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides = "example-slides"` references 
#   `content/slides/example-slides.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides = ""`.
slides = ""

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = ""
url_slides = "slides/ISCB2017_Erler_2017-07-06.pdf"
url_video = ""
url_code = ""

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = true

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder. 
[image]
  # Caption (optional)
  caption = ""

  # Focal point (optional)
  # Options: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight
  focal_point = "Right"
+++
